---
title: "Livestream"
year: 2019
artist: "Pekko Vasantola"
banner: "livestream.jpg"
arturl: ""
---

Livestream creates constantly changing virtual space which is generated by
different machines and systems. With computer vision as a technique and open
internet connected cameras as a material, it peeks into human life as a
spectator. The screen fills with live videos of random people picked from random
places around the world. Livestream is a story where no one is in control and
events occur randomly, affecting the whole. The story is happening now – and it
is true.

***

Livestream is a program which goes through thousands of IP cameras and tries to
find people from them with object detection technique. If it "sees" person in
the given video feed, it crops out the detected area and shows the cropped image
in the artwork.

The documentation video linked to this form is recorded 8.8.2019 between 4pm to
5pm. (GMT+2:00). I combined few clips of the work to 8 minute recorded video.

The work is made with Python language, Tensorflow machine learning library, Yolo
object detection algorithm and OpenCV computer vision library. I used Darkflow
implementation by Trieu H. Trinh between Darknet and Tensorflow to get the Yolo
algorithm work with Tensorflow.

The work has been shown in Brinkkala Gallery in Turku, Finland and it is going
to be in an exhibition in Wäinö Aaltonen Museum in Finland from October 2019 to
January 2020. The biggest Finnish news paper Helsingin Sanomat also writes about
this work. The article is published on week 33.
